pride is a sin that pretty much every
single human being struggles with in
some way shape or form because Pride
presents itself in so many different
forms Pride can come in entitlement or
in jealousy or in comparison or in
arrogance or even just independency from
God like a lack of dependence on God
whatever it may be pride comes in many
different forms and if you're watching
this I would assume you're watching this
because you know that you struggle with
pride in some way and you want to
overcome it so welcome to the house of
Jacob podcast where in this house we
serve the Lord I'm your host braxon and
in this week's video we're going to talk
about overcoming Pride with Jesus focus
on the with Jesus because we as humans
can ironically pridefully think that we
can overcome certain sins just on our
own with you know some sort of
discipline or instruction but
instruction and discipline can't get rid
of the fact that you have a flesh and
you need God's help to crucify it and
its
desires Jesus says in John chapter 15
that apart from me you can do nothing we
need Jesus's help we need God's help if
we're going to overcome sin especially
Pride because pride is a sneaky sin
Pride enters the heart stealthily and
often it goes unnoticed that's why so
many people struggle with pride and they
don't even know it because they're
blinded by their own Pride you know what
I mean so let's talk about why pride is
dangerous I gave you a couple reasons at
the beginning of this video but pride is
dangerous because it comes in so many
different forms Pride can blind us
deceive us it can puff us up arrogantly
thinking of ourselves too highly Pride
can divide us against each other Pride
can make us compare ourselves Pride can
make us stop relying on God for even
just the breath in our lungs I know for
me sometimes I go weeks without praying
that God provides breath in my lungs
that God wakes me up tomorrow morning
because I arrogantly think I'm just
going to be here tomorrow morning it's
like what James says in James 4 you're
like a Mist that appears for a little
bit and then vanishes you don't even
know what your life is you're not even
guaranteed tomorrow see we can
pridefully think that we don't even need
God this why pride is so dangerous
because it blinds us it deceives us
Pride isn't honest pride is never honest
I mean think about it do you need God
yes of course for everything but you can
pridefully start to think that you don't
need God for certain things that you
don't need God to drive safely to work
that you don't need God to wake up
tomorrow morning that you don't need God
for good health you can pridefully be
blinded to think that see the dangers of
Pride now it blinds you it deceives you
and ironically what Pride does is when
it deceives you it makes you think it's
honest so for example when you're
arrogantly thinking of yourself so
highly with your chest puffed up like
yeah you know I'm the stuff you know I'm
I'm so confident you think that's the
truth you're blinded by it but pride is
lying to you you're completely deceived
by pride and pride just blinds us
because it just makes us think so highly
of ourselves or view things so wrongly
that it it lies to us and we take it as
a truth we take it as a truth that we
should think of oursel that highly we
ENT we fall into entitlement a form of
Pride and we think that people owe us
something that maybe even God owes us
something God why don't I have this
prayer answered I've been doing this and
this and this for you that's Pride
that's entitlement pride comes in so
many different ways shapes or form but
more than anything and here's the one I
want to focus on more than anything
Pride rids us of our need for God pride
gets rid of our need for God because we
arrogantly think that we can do it on
our own we arrogantly think that we can
have good health on our own drive safely
on our own that we can provide you know
food on the table on our own that we can
you know earn money on our own but God
is the one who gives these things James
says every good and perfect gift comes
from above that job that breath in your
lungs waking up another morning it's
it's all from God you need God for all
of it so I want to talk
about what scripture says about Pride
because scripture talks about Pride a
lot if you've ever read the Bible
especially the Proverbs it talks about
Pride like a lot and pride says this so
there's a proverb that says this it says
I believe it's Proverbs yeah it's
Proverbs 168 18 to 19 it says Pride goes
before destruction and a hotty spirit
before a fall it is better to be of a
lowly spirit with the poor than to
divide the spoil with the proud pride
comes before a fall you know why cuz God
humbles those who are proud and I tell
you what if I could give you any piece
of advice as like an older brother in
Christ or even maybe to some of you a
younger brother in Christ if I could
give you any piece of advice it is way
better that you humble yourself before
God before God humbles you before
himself because that's a lot more pain
when God humbles you it's a lot easier
to humble yourself before God before God
humbles you you see what I mean and
Peter tells us in First Peter to Humble
ourselves before the mighty hand of God
and in due time he will exalt us when we
humble oursel God exalts us it's it's
like this contrast when we lift
ourselves up on our own God humbles us
Pride goes before a fall but when we
humble ourselves before God and we come
to him with Open Hands we come to him in
need God exalts us God lifts us up isn't
that funny so it's like this kind of
paradox here when God humbles the
prideful but the humble he exalts he
raises the humble which is so funny
because the pride think the prideful
think that they're exalted they think
they're above the poor in spirit but the
poor in spirit are the ones who get
lifted above the prideful so it's better
to be humbled by God or no sorry it's
better to be humble yourself than be
humbled by God because it's painful when
God humbles you and anyone who has
prayed God humble me who is watching
this knows that it's tough knows that
it's tough when God humbles you that's a
prayer that a lot of people stay away
from because God God does it every
single time Proverbs 8:13 says this it
says the fear of the Lord is hatred of
evil pride and arrogance and the way of
evil and perverted speech I hate think
about that Proverbs 8 Proverbs 8 it's
wisdom speaking here so think about this
wisdom hates Pride meaning Pride isn't
Wise It's foolish if wisdom hates Pride
it means Pride's not wise pride is
foolish and why well think about what
we've been talking about this whole
episode Pride blinds you Pride deceives
you Pride makes you independent Pride
isolates you Pride makes you compare
Pride makes you entitled Pride makes you
jealous whatever it may be pride is
foolish there's there's not a scenario
where being prideful is ever beneficial
to you or other people ever
humility every single time humility
always benefits you humility always
benefits others humility always is
loving and wise it's not foolish
James 4:6 says this James 4:6 says but
he gives more grace therefore it says
God opposes the proud but gives grace to
the humble God's favor is upon those who
are humble not arrogant God opposes the
proud and I'll tell you what in my life
I have had Seasons where I was
struggling with pride heavily and I
could literally I remember this it was
when I was at school in Oklahoma and I
was arrogant I was struggling with a lot
of Pride because I was finally dealing
with this the like the the main sins in
my life I finally wasn't struggling with
them anymore so I got arrogant I started
thinking myself highly I was like yeah
I'm a better Christian than other people
you know I can do it on my own I don't
need God and I remember I was taking a
bus back to my dorm I was listening to I
believe um oh praise the name and I just
got hit and what happened was the Holy
Spirit literally revealed every single
sin in my life that I was blind to
because I pridefully thought yeah I
don't really struggle with sin anymore
and the holy Spirit like lifted the
curtains and was like look at this this
this this this this this and there was
so much and I had no clue and it
burdened me and I literally started
crying on the bus I'm not kidding I
started tearing up on the bus cuz I was
like oh my gosh I'm an idiot I'm still
I'm so sinful I'm so how could I forget
how much I need God and his forgiveness
I'm not kidding I went home to my dorm
and I closed the door behind me when I
walked into my room took my I think my
beanie or my hat off and I went I went
face down on the floor and just weeped
before God and I said God I humble
myself before you you oppose the proud I
humble myself before you God please
forgive me for my arrogance and when I
did this I could literally feel a weight
lifted off of me like like like almost
physically but definitely spiritually
and emotionally but physically too I
could feel this like weight lifted off
me why because God opposes the proud and
God was literally opposing me
spiritually and emotionally and I could
feel it it doesn't mean God wasn't
forgiving me it doesn't mean God wasn't
still gracious to me but God was
opposing my pride it's it's completely
opposite to God's character Pride I mean
think about it what made Satan fall
Pride it's opposite to God's
character and I could just feel God
opposing me in this season because God
opposes the proud so we should do what
Peter says we should humble oursel
before the mighty hand of God so let's
talk about how to do that because here's
what I really want to focus on more than
anything in this
episode is how to become humble
Christians because because we need more
humble Christians let's read Romans 12
3-4 for by the grace given to me I say
to everyone among you not to think of
himself more highly than he ought to
think but to think with sober judgment
each according to the measure of faith
that God has assigned for as in one body
we have many members and the members do
not all have the same function so in the
context here Paul was saying that we're
all parts of the body of Christ we all
need each other and to not think of
ourselves more highly than we should
think
and this leads me into how we humble
ourselves we don't think of ourselves
more highly than we should think but
more than anything we understand our
relationship with God I firmly believe
as Christians that when we truly
understand God's word and we truly
understand the gospel and God's
character when we truly know the Lord
and how he works it is almost impossible
to struggle with pride 1 Corinthians 4:7
says this it says for who sees anything
different in you what do you have that
you did not receive
if then you received it why do you boast
as if you did not receive it you know
what Paul is teaching here as a
Christian there's no room for Pride
because everything that you have you've
received think about it like this what
name one thing to me that you could be
prideful about your looks your spiritual
gifts your talents your job how much
money you make all of those things have
been given to you so there's no room to
be prideful I could be prideful about I
don't know my looks but who made me that
way God I could be Pride
about the job I have but who gave me
that God I could be prideful about you
know how good I am at something but who
gave me that Talent God I could be
prideful about my spiritual gifts but
who gave me those God as a Christian
there is no room to be prideful because
everything comes from God I can't be
prideful because nothing is my own James
1:17 says every good and perfect gift
comes from above from the he from the
father of heavenly lights who does not
change like shifting shadow
every good gift comes from above so
there's no room for you to be prideful
as a Christian because everything you
have you've received from God how can
you be prideful about something that you
know you've received how can I be
prideful about how much money I have if
I knew that money was donated to me you
know if someone randomly walked up to me
and wrote me a check for $100,000 cuz I
was in need how could I be arrogant
about the fact I have $100,000 when that
person gave me $100,000 that's not my
own nothing you have is your own it was
loan to you by God that's how we humble
ourselves as Christians we understand
that everything we have was given to us
by God that's how we humble ourselves
and that's why I say that when you truly
read the word of God and you truly know
God and how and the gospel and things
like this it's really hard to become
prideful because everything God gives
you is by his grace Paul says I believe
in Romans chapter 8 if I remember which
chapter correctly how wouldn't he who
gave his only son for us graciously give
us all things pay attention to that
graci iously give us all things meaning
everything that God gives us is
graciously it's by his grace and if it's
by his grace it means it's undeserved
everything you have that you could ever
be prideful about was not deserved even
you being even you existing God didn't
have to create
you you don't have to live today God
doesn't have to give you more breath in
in your
lungs so I want to encourage you one of
the best way is to overcome Pride every
time I catch myself struggling with
pride cuz I tell you what as someone in
this position as someone who has a bit
of a following it's easy to become
arrogant cuz it's like I can deceive
myself to think oh these people all
these people watching me you know but
it's like all these people people are
watching me because they love God they
love God's word it's nothing about me so
it's easy for me to humble myself even
when I look at the numbers and I start
to get arrogant about maybe how many
followers I have or subscribers or
whatever it is it doesn't matter because
God's the one blessing that God's the
one providing Paul says 1 Corinthians 3
it's God who gives the growth I may
watering or planting but God gives the
growth so I struggle with pride I will
openly confess to you guys that pride is
one of the sins that I struggle with
probably the most by far I would say
pride and idolatry are the things I
struggle with it's easy for me to get
Idols in my heart it's easy for me to
think too highly of myself but I also
know that I've learned in my walk with
Christ that it's so easy to humble
yourself when you know that everything
you have is not your own nor was it
deserved it's hard to be arrogant about
something that's not even your own and
more than anything I want to confess to
you guys that Pride messes up my prayer
life sometimes because I forget my need
for God I remember when I was at school
at
Oklahoma last year I would my prayer
life has not been the same since it was
incredible I prayed on the way to class
on the way back from class first thing
in the morning first thing before bed I
would I thought I muted myself first
thing before bed you know I would pray
before the gym I'd pray after the gym
I'd pray after the gym I would I was
always in prayer like I was doing my
best to do what Paul says in 1
Thessalonians 5 like pray without
seizing I was doing that but lately my
prayer life has been so dead and I know
it's because of
Pride sometimes our prayer lives get
dead not because we don't believe not
because we don't have faith in our
prayers sometimes they get dead because
we're prideful and we don't think that
we need God sometimes our prayer lives
get dead because we forget that we need
God for the breath in our lungs that we
need God to protect us from injury at
the gym that we need God to get us there
safe as we drive to wherever we're going
sometimes it's not a lack of faith that
is why you're struggling in your prayer
life sometimes it's a abundance of Pride
so I want to encourage you with that
that you need to humble yourself that
you can humble yourself by understanding
that everything you have was given to
you by God's grace it was never deserved
all is given to you graciously and more
than anything Pride can deceive you
Pride can blind you and most of all
Pride can remove you of your dependency
on God it's why Jesus tells us we have
child like Faith a child humbly knows
that they need their parent for
everything a child humbly knows they
need the parent for the roof over their
head that they need their parent for the
food on the
table that their parent provides for
them that the parent cares for them Pro
that their parent provides a place to
stay it's why we need childlike Faith
but we can get puffed up and think I
don't need God I don't need God to have
a good workout I don't need God for food
on the table I don't need God to bless
this food I don't need God for money I
don't need God for a job but it's wrong
it's not true it doesn't work that way
every good and perfect gift comes from
above I mean if all life comes through
God from God and there is no life apart
from God your existence itself is
dependent on God so there is no part of
your life that you do not need God for
and I want you to humbly know that
because I need a humbly know that like
I'm not hopping on this platform and
condemning you guys and rebuking you
guys for things while pretending I don't
struggle with them I'm telling you guys
pride has ruined my life so many times
Pride will even blind you to your sin
it'll make you think you're not doing
things wrong Pride does so many
different things and I just hope this
encouraged you guys so let us pray Lord
Jesus I thank you for your word I thank
you for your scripture um and I thank
you for this word you've put ahead of us
in today's um video I pray for every
single person that will watch this video
at some point God I pray you bless them
and keep them and make your face shine
upon them I pray you would be gracious
unto to them turn your face toward them
and give them peace God I pray you help
them in their struggle with pride help
them to Humble themselves God I pray you
humble themselves as if I pray you
humble them if they're not going to do
it themselves I pray you help them to
Humble themselves before your hand so
that you may exalt them God I pray you
help them to see the danger of their
pride I pray you reveal to them the
pride within their heart in every area
of their life whether that be
entitlement jealousy comparison whatever
it may be pray for every single person
would you reveal where pride is in their
hearts in their lives in their minds God
I pray you help them in their struggle
help me in my struggle with pride and
help us to remember that we need you for
everything whether that be our existence
whether that be the breath in our lungs
whether that be every single day we need
you and we know this in Jesus mighty
name amen guys I love you guys God bless
you guys I pray this video helped you
because most of my videos I feel like I
have a question for you guys if you're
watching this at the end can you tell
which videos I have a script or not cuz
some videos I write out notes and those
tend to be my best videos because I'm
like like I I have a structure I know
what to talk about in when so I don't
run in circles and then some videos I
just don't have the time to do it so I
just get the scripture that's what I did
today I just got the
scripture and just kind of let the Holy
Spirit lead this
conversation
but can you guys tell like cuz sometimes
I get scared when I don't do notes
because I'm like what if I'm not going
to bring the word that God has given me
for this video to the fullest extent
that I could if I did notes so just let
me know if this video helped you guys um
and also let me know if you guys can
tell when I do notes and when I don't do
notes like I can openly tell you guys
which episodes I did notes on like I
know I don't think I did notes for the
god Still Loves You episode um I didn't
do notes for the Romans 122
episode I don't think I did notes last
week I don't know but um God bless you
guys I love you guys and I think in next
week's video we're going to talk about
overcoming selfishness with Jesus um
we're going to kind of do a any series
over the next couple weeks about how to
overcome certain things so um if you're
watching this before we leave if there's
something you're struggling with that
you want to see talked about in the
podcast something that we want to talk
about overcoming drop a comment I'll see
it and hopefully we'll eventually get
around to it next week it should be
selfishness if the Lord Wills obviously
I don't know I'm going to inquire with
the Lord I'm going to spend some time in
prayer and maybe that's what he wants me
to talk about maybe it's idolatry or
something else but we'll figure it out I
love you guys God bless you guys I'll
see you in next week's episode
