Cliff and Stuart Connect. Welcome guys.
Thank you Charlie.
So uh for some audience members that
might not be aware, introduce
yourselves.
I'm Cliff Conley. I'm an obnoxious twit
who the Holy Spirit is changing and I
try and pres combine the grace and love
and truth of Christ and communicate it
on university campuses and at the church
where Stuart and I get to pastor and I
get to be this guy's dad. So, I'm an
awful proud dad.
That's that's amazing. So, you've been
doing this on campuses for a while, kind
of similar to what I do somewhat from a
political standpoint, but we're unafraid
to to talk about
the deeper things, more important
things. talk talk about that. I mean,
that's
Yeah, sure. I will. You know why I like
him?
Because he hasn't made the mistake of
elevating politics over faith in Christ.
Okay.
Obviously, we can slip into a type of
nationalism that is rah rah country and
leave God out of the equation. That is
lethal. And what Charlie does in a way
that I've come to respect is because
I've been
uh confronted by more and more of this
type of issue is he puts Christ at the
center. God is the basis of your world
view. And then because of that, you
respect your country. You're very
grateful for what our foreathers and
forefathers have done in putting this
country together. And you want to return
it to the Judeo-Christian ethic that was
the foundation of this f this country.
Even though we're well aware of the fact
that many of the founding mothers and
fathers were deists and no, we're not
deists. We believe in a personal God
who's involved in our lives today, not
in a distant god who remains aloof. So
we disagree with Thomas Jefferson with
the Jeffersonian Bible, but we're very
grateful for the Judeo-Christian ethic
that ethics that our forefathers and
foremothers held to so tightly.
Well, thank you for that. And so I I
have you seen let's just talk in the
last couple of years both of you
visiting campuses be interesting to hear
you say what are you hearing what are
you seeing have things changed in recent
years talk about trends I think our
audience would be interested in that
so 30 years ago I was a little young but
from what I hear it was is there truth
and then 20 years ago it was okay
there's truth maybe lowerase maybe
uppercase but what Is this truth? Let's
have a dialogue today. It's all right.
I'm in a lot of pain. I think you may
have mentioned it in your one of your
talks. Divorce rates, death from
despair, depression, anxiety
skyrocketing. And so that's the trend.
I've seen some of the very similar
questions. Is God a moral monster?
Slavery? Why does God allow suffering?
All those are are pretty much the same
and similar. But I think I think the
growth again in pain in whether that's
psychological, relational, oftentimes
that's connected to nihilism because
somebody who doesn't believe in God,
it's I have no objective meaning and
purpose. I came almost an accident,
accidental birth, and I'm going nowhere.
And my favorite is when I actually see
happy nihilists because it's the biggest
contradiction probably out there that we
see on college campuses. But literally,
we will have students come up to us and
say, "I'm a nihilist. I have no meaning
and purpose in my life." But hey, I'm
here, you know, yolo. I'm here for a
good time, not a long time. And so
that's that's the new narrative I think
we see.
So can do you want to comment on that,
Cliff, as far as trends, things you've
seen?
Sure.
And and talk about the process of how
you do this on campuses. I would just be
personally interested to hear that.
You bet. Um, I am not here to butter him
up. Okay? In fact, I don't like talking
about people. All right? But but guys,
for 44 years, I've been standing up on
university campuses dialoguing with
students. Now, I am committed to
pointing people to God's existence.
Therefore, morality is not subjective.
There are few moral absolutes.
Therefore, the logical conclusion is not
despair. There's hope because there's a
God who has eternal life in heaven for
all who trust in his son, Jesus. All
right. Now, I don't feel comfortable
going into the political arena. That's
why I respect what he's doing. It's very
hard to communicate Christ and then also
to challenge people to think, okay, what
are the ramifications of your belief in
Christ, especially politically,
especially culturally. That gets real
hard. And one of the reasons it's hard
is because we don't all agree, right?
You go around in this room and I don't
think we're all going to agree on
everything. That's where tolerance comes
in. Tolerance is not an atheist and I
agree. No, we don't agree. Tolerance is
although you are an atheist, I respect
you and we're going to have an
intelligent dialogue. Now, that's what
he does and that's what we try and do.
Intelligent dialogue, guys. That's what
a liberal arts education is all about. A
free exchange of ideas where we don't
necessarily agree, but we communicate
respectfully and we explain why we
believe what we believe. What's the
evidence whatever it is you believe is
true. So, that's the kind of thing that
we want.
The most important thing is always
Jesus. The second most important thing
is making sure that we could talk about
Jesus and worship Jesus, which is
increasingly more difficult. So, so talk
about the process. You guys set up a
table on campus. People come up and talk
to you for the audience that might not
be aware.
Yeah. So, we've never set up a table. We
get invited by different student
organizations and we go. Back in the
day, he would have to start, which is
that's that's the bold part, right? You
have to speak and somehow find a way to
get people to stop and actually engage.
But now, thankfully, God has used social
media in a big way. So, when we go,
there's already a very big crowd. even
at very secular schools like Yukon, very
hostile crowd. So that's how we start.
We get invited by different
organizations. We show up, they
oftentimes will start the crowd, but
then it'll gather and grow very quickly.
Then we go about debate and then we go
about connecting with as many students
as possible. But the important part, I
think you were kind of getting to your
second part, is disciplehip. We don't
want to go. Sadly, Billy Graham, we're
huge Billy Graham fans, but if you look
statistically when he would do his
crusades, a very high percentage of
people after three weeks would turn away
from the faith who went the alter calls.
So, what we try and do is we make sure
these organizations on their outreach
nights where we speak at and that'll
have a lot of students show up. But we
don't want there just to be an event
that we speak at at the end of the week.
We say, "Guys, we are here not just to
evangelize. We need disciplehip so these
students will stay in the faith and
understand what real scripture is.
When you went to Genesis 22 for example
last night, like specific scripture,
this is what we need. It can't just be
this type of higher power. Oh yeah, I'm
a Christian now, but I just never read
the Bible. So that that's part of the
process. So um the that's very
important. You went on Logan Paul's
podcast, which I'm sure you you got a
couple emails and things from that. Talk
about that experience. What an amazing
way that God used you to reach a
population that has not heard the
gospel. All right, so here's some of the
challenges. I really respect Logan Paul.
He began our time together by saying, "I
am not a Christian, but maybe by the end
of this podcast, I will be."
No pressure.
Yeah. Yeah.
I mean, that kind of honesty and
vulnerability, goodness gracious, that's
cool. I found him to be a very nice guy,
and it was fascinating. His sticking
point, his sticking point was, "You got
to be kidding me. Good Jews and good
Muslims and good Hindus, they need to
accept Christ." I mean, that just is too
narrow. That's just too bigoted. It's
too intolerant. And so, what I was
trying to help him see was if I say that
every path leads to God, that's a truth
claim. I'm saying majority of Muslims,
the majority of humanity, which is
Muslims, Christians, and Jews, they're
wrong. Every path leads to heaven.
That's a truth claim. If I say to you
half the religions and philosophies of
the world lead to heaven, that's a truth
claim. I'm saying half are right and
half are wrong. That is a truth claim.
And when Jesus says, "I am the way, the
truth, and the life. No one comes to the
father except through me." That's also a
truth claim. He's saying you got to put
your faith in me. I am the way to
heaven. So, let's be real honest. We all
make truth claims. Let's not sit back
sit back and act like, "Oh, I'm a really
open-minded, really tolerant person
because I say all paths lead to heaven.
All paths lead to God. No, you're making
a truth claim. And I can promise you if
I say that 1 plus 1 equals two, I'm not
necessarily being arrogant. Now, I might
be arrogant, but just to make a truth
claim does not mean you're being
arrogant and intolerant. It means this
is my take on reality. You better ask me
what's the evidence that your take on
reality is true. And I'm going to ask
you the same question. And what is your
take on reality? What's the evidence
that your take on reality is true? So,
so kind of tell us about the discussion
you had with him and either one of you
the response that you received.
I thought he was really genuine. He gets
pegged for trying just to poke holes and
then walk away. But I thought he was
genuine. I mean, he did ask questions
like, "Will animals be in heaven?" And,
you know, the lion will lie down with
the sheep. So, I believe that animals
will be in heaven literally. He would
ask questions like, you know, why Jesus?
amongst other religions. He would he
said he got burned a few times by
Christians who were so judgmental about
other faiths. And so we dug into that a
little bit, but you know, his mom was
sitting there the whole time. And I
guess his mom typically doesn't show up,
but she showed up for us and she held
her cross out the entire time, kind of
pointing it to Logan, pointing it to us.
And I I think that shows her obvious
desire to get her sons, him and Jake,
really thinking about the faith and
moving towards the faith. So that was a
very very interesting part of it because
he would he would really come after he
mainly really went after you. I tried to
more of the emotional connection and and
yet at the same time I think at at the
end of the time he was a genuine he was
genuinely wrestling and and yet he would
turn to his mom and try and again push
back on her faith. So it's fascinating
dynamics but offset yet again there was
still an hour of time where he wanted to
connect. So
so but the his his objection was that
Christianity is too true or something or
that
too narrow?
Too narrow. Yeah.
I'm being facitious. I just
that's good. I mean, like too too
narrow. I I don't understand the the
objection there. Like what what what
would that that apparently he's just
saying that God no way that God would
allow this to happen? That God would not
send a son or what what would his I
didn't watch the entire you
interview.
All right. Who here has a problem with
the idea of God being angry? All right.
Well, Logan has a problem with God being
angry. And guess what? So do a lot of
Americans. You know, God is love. I
don't get angry. The wrath of God. I
mean, how primitive. You really believe
that? Yeah, I sure do believe that. You
know why? Cuz I promise you that if one
of you kidnaps one of my little
granddaughters, I'm going to be real
angry. And guess what? If I'm not angry,
my granddaughter doesn't matter to me.
Not with a selfish anger, but with a
righteous indignation. Is God angry?
Yes, he is. Not with a selfish anger.
Oh, you've offended me. Oh, you rained
on my party. No, none of that. with a
righteous indignation of how we
dehumanize each other. That's sin.
Racism is dehumanizing. Sexism is
dehumanizing. Sexually exploiting
someone is dehumanizing. She's not a
Barbie doll. She's a human being created
in the image of God. Don't use her
sexually. Greed. Dehumanizing. Your
money's more important than you are. I
want your money. Coveting. Dehumanizing.
And so God is angry because we
dehumanize each other. And God has
created us not to dehumanize each other
but to respect each other, to love each
other.
So when you visit campuses, is that the
most common sticking point that the path
is too narrow? If you had to really
bring it down, what is the limiting
current belief of Gen Z when confronted
with the truth that prevents them from
accepting Jesus? What would that be?
Yeah, moral relativism for sure. And
this white western adopted philosophy
which is all religions are true and how
dare you say that you have the right
religion. So they will say, "Look at the
elephant. Look at all paths lead up to
the mountaintop." So all religions are
just grabbing. One's grabbing the ear,
one's grabbing the foot of the elephant,
one's grabbing the trunk. And see, you
guys are all just grabbing part of God.
And yet what they don't get is, well,
those people are blind. So they don't
realize they're grabbing parts of the
elephant. Well, okay. Then someone has
tremendous vigilance and spiritual
superiority to say, "I'm the one who's
not blind. And I see Charlie grabbing
the trunk, so he's Buddhist. I see Cliff
grabbing the foot, so he's Hindu. So you
guys are all idiots. All gods are the
same." What you don't realize is you are
not only spiritually elitist, but you
are also rejecting the exclusive truth
claims of 95% of the world. That's one
of the biggest challenges. Would you
agree with that? Is that the the core
objection you got you receive?
Yeah. And now let's be real honest. I
think it really comes down to I want to
sleep with whoever I want to sleep with.
Well, that's a separate issue though.
But meaning that they don't meaning that
they won't believe it if it's true.
That's Frank Turk's line. Would you
believe Christianity if it was true?
Right.
And most people would not because it
would change their life.
Correct. And so therefore, the reason I
reject Christ is for a moral reason. And
then I hide behind the intellectual
reason. But if you push comes to shove,
I mean, my younger brother went to
Princeton University. And at Princeton,
he used to share Christ with his
roommates late into the night around
about midnight. He turned to his
Princeton classmates and say, "Guys, I
if you're just going to ask these
questions, we'll pull them all nighter
if this is honest. But if the real issue
is I want to sleep around and I want to
cheat on my next exam because their
pressure to get into med school is
intense, then let's h be honest. And
every single time his Princeton
classmates would say, "Steuart, you're
correct. This is not an intellectual
problem. It's a moral issue."
And he would say, "Guys, wait. We don't
have to pull an all nighter. Good night.
Have a good night's sleep."
So then, how then do you overcome that,
if at all?
I think it's for me it's it's getting
rather simple the older the older I get.
You know, morality is relative. which
means the guy who took a whack at
President Trump and killed another guy.
It's all relative. That's his definition
of truth. And the trade traffic, well,
you know, it's all relative. So, if you
don't if you're upset about it, fine.
But I kind of enjoy it. And truth is
relative. You know something? You can't
live that out because even when you were
a little kid, if your sibling got more
ice cream in their ice cream bowl than
you did in your ice cream bowl, what
would you say? Oh, that's cool. No,
you'd say, "That's not fair." And if
you're married and your spouse takes a
whack at you, you don't say, "Oh, that
felt good, honey. Why don't you do that
again?" No, you say, "You should not do
that. You ought not to do that. It is
impossible to live out moral
relativism." Doesn't work. Is do you
find that to be persuasive to the
students you talk to?
I take a different route. That's
probably the better route. I take the
route though of look statistically two
guys from Yale wrote this book
premarital sex in America and
promiscuity is directly correlated with
serious mental health problems
especially for women. Men for some
reason are able to cut off their
emotions sexually from the physical side
and just live out their their physical
well-being of of shagging any woman they
possibly can. But there's clear
breakdown as well. These Yale authors
are writing showing that there's a
drastic increase in divorce if you're
sleeping around as well. But again, you
can go there.
Yeah.
But the best answer is making Christ
more attractive than just I'm going to
shag the next thing or person with a
pulse that I possibly can. And if Jesus
is more attractive in the way where he
says, "I love you unconditionally no
matter your failings. I offer you
grace." You know, it's the whole idea of
your job can't die for you. Your job, if
you find your identity in it, you're
going to be ultimately crushed. If you
find your identity in your life, you're
going to be ultimately crushed. It's St.
Augustine's order loves. If you put God
at the top, you will live a life of
incredible flourishing. So, that's
that's kind of where we're going.
Yeah. And I I want to get some questions
here in a second. I visit college
campuses as you guys do and I get the
spicier encounters at times. I'm sure
you you guys get them as well.
But but it's what's so fascinating is
that I'll come and talk primarily about
politics. But as you well know, I always
share the gospel whenever it comes up.
But inevitably, almost always if I go
and I have a a table and what I want to
talk about for the day never remains.
And it was it could be about
immigration. It could be about that
there are no genders and two sexes and
unlimited personalities. You know,
whatever it is, within minutes they are
asking me, well, are you religious?
Because they have been so trained and
conditioned cuz they want to get down
into where is this coming from? Because
if if you're saying something that's
true and they think about it, they say,
well,
is is there do you think there's a God
that's telling you this? because they
they want a moral license to live as
they want to live. Um, but what I found
is that almost all of these
conversations
yield back to some moral standard at
some point and they'll many college
students and even college professors
will deny the fact that there is a moral
standard, but they're living up to some
standard at some point. So someone tells
them that murder is wrong or murder is
evil or theft is wrong, they say, "Oh,
that's just common sense. I we just know
that I I I I know that murder is wrong.
I I I I I understand that. So like what
why we have so many murderers then if
everyone knows that it's wrong. So do
you guys encounter that as well that it
gets down to the deeper issues rather
quickly? Yes, definitely gets down to
the deeper issues rather quickly when
you have the privilege of talking with
thinking people and people have to
think. I mean, I am very grateful that
over 290 times in the gospels, Jesus
asks questions.
And this whole idea that faith is
anti-intellectual, faith is
anti-rational, faith is anti-logical.
That's a naive, blind faith. And Christ
does not call us to a naive, blind
faith. Does he call us to a something
you can prove? No. To prove means to
show it cannot be another way. I can't
prove, Charlie, that I'm not just a bad
dream you're having right now. Maybe
your eyesight is flipping out on you and
you're having this weird dream of Cliff.
So, I can't prove it. But the
overwhelming evidence is you're having
and I are having this conversation now.
That's why we behave the way we do. So,
we've got to use our minds and ask
ourselves, what does the evidence point
to as being true? I do not think the
universe is religiously ambiguous. I
think God has left more than enough
evidence for any thinking person to
believe in him. That's why anthropology
shows us that around the world, every
culture has some type of religion.
Yeah. Atheism is is the vast minority of
a new age belief.
Oh, yeah.
So, Daisy, let's start doing some
questions here. Um,
so I was articulated yesterday by a
couple of my friends that our country
was not founded on Christian principles.
Um, so I I want to see how like an
argument that you guys can give me to
combat that. So essentially they
articulated to me that our country was
found on common law uh because the
declaration only refers to God four
times in the constitution doesn't refer
to God at all and it only articulates
the structure of government. Um and does
is common law Christian in nature or is
it I
I can take it first. So I this guy
doesn't whoever said that doesn't really
know what they're talking about. So
first of all um remember that we were a
collection of states and colonies and
you need to read the state constitutions
before anything else. Nine out of 13 of
the original states required you to be a
Bible believing Christian to serve in
government at the time of the founding
you could even in p actually 13 out of
13 required a declaration of faith. Nine
out of 13 required you to be a
Protestant except Maryland which was
Catholic which still required a
declaration of faith. In almost every
single one of the original state
constitutions, Pennsylvania included,
they had I profess Lord in Jesus Christ
as my Lord and Savior in the original
state constitutions. So you remember
we're a collection of states before
that. Secondly, 55 out of 56 of the
original signers of the declaration were
Bible believing church attending
Christians. You ask about common law. So
common law is inherited from Blackstone
who was Christian. It a common law is an
outgrowth of the scriptures. So let's go
to three principles of common law.
presumption of innocence, due process,
and jury of your peers. All three are
biblical principles. So, and all wrapped
into the ultimate biblical principle
that you shall not favor justice if you
are rich or poor, which is in Leviticus
19, right before most famous part of
Leviticus 19, which is that you should
love your neighbor as yourself. But
before that is that in the
administration of justice, you shall not
favor the rich or the poor, which is the
idea of blind justice. We get that in
the west, which is incorporated also in
the New Testament ideal. Neither slave
nor Greek nor Jew. were all one in Jesus
Christ which the idea of human equality.
These are all biblical ideas. They're
not enlightenment ideas which is they
kind of get conflated at the time. But
more importantly than that they say that
God was only mentioned four times in the
Declaration of Independence. Well,
that's a big deal. Okay. Laws of nature
and nature's God. The last paragraph of
the declaration reads as a prayer. It
says we appeal to the supreme judge of
the universe. Who's the judge of the
universe? Jesus Christ. As it says in
Revelation that Jesus will judge the
earth on his throne. this. So in the
declaration they were praying to Christ
our Lord as a prayer very specifically.
Thirdly as I said on stage yesterday
Deuteronomy was by far the most quoted
book religious or non-religious in the
time of the founding when they were
putting together constitution more than
John Lock more than Montisscu more than
Blackstone. So the book of Deuteronomy
which talked about laws, customs,
traditions, it was Moses' farewell
address as he's, you know, about to say
goodbye. Say, "Hey, good luck in Canaan,
guys. Here's how you should set up your
form of government." But finally, and
most importantly, let's look at actually
what the founders said. John Adams
seamlessly said, "The Constitution was
only written for a moral and religious
people. It was holy and adequate for the
people of any other. The body politic of
America was so Christian and was so
Protestant that our form and structure
of government was built for the people
that believed in Christ our Lord. One of
the reasons we're living through a
constitutional crisis is that we no
longer have a Christian nation, but we
have a Christian form of government and
they're incompatible. So you cannot have
liberty if you do not have a Christian
population. So that that's just that's
just a surface level belief. So then
they'll go to the first amendment which
is has two two parts of the first
amendment which get conflated. First of
all, separation of church and state is
not in the US Constitution. That is a
single letter that Thomas Jefferson
wrote in 1807 to the Danbury Baptist
Convention in Massachusetts assuring
them that the government would not come
after the church. Okay, which is the
opposite of what they would say.
However, that was then resurrected by
the Warren Court and the Burger Court in
the '60s where they said, "Hey, you
know, all of a sudden we're now going to
make this as if it's the Constitution."
It does say in the Constitution two
things, which is the establishment
clause and the free free expression
clause. The establishment clause is that
Congress shall make no law prohibiting
the free exercise thereof. What they
were most worried about was a
Presbyterian or a Anglican or a Quaker
type religion taking over the federal
government. Instead, it was that there
is not going to be a state-run religion
or a state-run government. Did you know
that one of the first acts of Congress
was taxpayer funded Bible printing and
distribution? Did you know that there
were church services held in the Supreme
Court building as late as the Jackson
presidency in the 1820s? But going back
to this idea of separation of church and
state, and again I could riff on this at
at nauseium because it's just so
ridiculous, right? Is that it's not
biblical because first it's not
biblical. It's not constitutional
because you go a layer deeper. People
that even say that do you believe in
separation of morality and state? Nobody
does. So all laws are reflection of
morality and all morality comes from
somewhere. There is no such thing as
neutral morality. And we believe what
the founders believed because they put
it in the halls of Congress. They put it
in the Supreme Court and they put it all
throughout the country which is that the
decalogue the ten commandments is the
core morality of how a society and a
civilization should ex should exist.
Right? The the ten commandments of every
person. And finally, and this is the
kicker, if the founding fathers were not
Bible believing church uh church
Christians, why did they put Leviticus
on the liberty bill? Not John, not
Psalms, not Proverbs, not Genesis.
Leviticus. Most Americans can't spell
Leviticus. Leviticus 25:19. Proclaim
liberty throughout the land of which you
are in. It is one of the most sinister,
most unsubstantiated lies that does not
come up against any sort of academic
scrutiny. This idea that the founding
fathers were a bunch of enlightenment
common law deists. The reason they hate
it is because if they the reason they
must say this is that if we actually go
back to our Christian roots and we go
back to where we once were, it's
America's best hope for revival and for
a great future.
You want to add to that anything? Sorry,
that covered it. That was pretty
impressive.
Yeah, I can't touch that.
Beautifully put.
Yeah.
Okay. Is it working? Yeah. Okay. Hey
guys, big fan. I know I ran into my
name's Ridge. I'm here with my wife and
my younger brother and some of my our
best friends. I know I ran into you two
last night, but just want to elaborate
on that a little bit about that tragedy
and ask a question. Um, and Charlie, I
haven't had the pleasure of meeting you
yet, but I we lost our uh 18-year-old
brother back in October to an accident
in our front yard. And we're constantly
told like, "Oh, you guys might be might
have to move on. You guys might need to
kind of like put it in the past. It
happened. Get over it." And we do have
really good days where we get to share
his story and share the gospel. But with
those good days, there's also some
really, really bad days where anger
comes out. And I mean, I might get mad
at my wife. I might get mad at the
family, at the kids. What's your advice?
And what do you have to say about how to
cope with those really bad days that we
have, all of us collectively being
really close to him after his loss. All
right. I'm really sorry for your loss,
brother. It stinks. And that's one of
the reasons I'm so glad that in 1
Corinthians 15, Paul writes, "Death is
the last enemy." I am sick and tired of
hearing people say, "Oh, death is just
part of nature." So, just accept it. No,
I don't accept death. That's why we fund
hospitals. That's why we do medicine
because we are against death and we're
for life. And that's what Jesus said.
I've come that you might have life and
have it to the full. Second point. All
right, wife and
brother and family. You've heard the man
say, "I'm hurting." And at time I'm
okay, but at other times I get really
angry. Okay? He's been honest, right?
He's been honest with all of us. He's
been vulnerable. So now we got to be
patient with each other, right? We got
to love each other through the hard
times. And it's a hard time you're
passive. The most difficult day of my
life was when my 7-year-old niece was
knocked into a early grave in a horrible
car accident. And I had to go out to
Madison, Wisconsin, where my brother,
who was a transplant surgeon at
WMadison, was transplanting kidneys and
livers. And I had to walk with him
around a field behind his home in
Madison, Wisconsin. And he's pouring out
his heart to me about the death of his
7-year-old daughter. And if anybody
thinks they got an easy answer for that
question, they're nuts. The answer, the
honest answer first is I do not know why
the babysitter didn't see the stop sign.
Why she went right through the stop sign
and a pickup truck at 55 mph came
careening down the road, smashing into
the car, sending my seven-year-old niece
into an early grave. I don't know why
God allowed that to happen. And so
therefore, we got to be patient with
each other. We got to love each other.
We got to be committed to each other as
we go through these painful, difficult
times.
The third point is what's comfort?
Comfort is presence. So you being
together as a family with your presence
is crucial. And even more important is
God's presence with you. The presence of
Jesus Christ. And that's where all of
this talk and all of these answers to
all these difficult questions gets real
practical. It's not an issue of a good
answer to a difficult question. Now it's
an issue of presence. I need you to be
with me cuz I'm hurting. my loved one
died and it stinks. And now all of a
sudden faith becomes real personal
because now it's an issue of do I know
the presence of God? And brother, I'm 70
years old, so you're a lot younger than
me. And I'm still working on that. I
want to know the presence of God cuz
it's hard. And I was really ticked when
Time magazine came out with Mother
Teresa on the cover saying, "Oh, the
woman struggled with doubt. See, she
didn't really have real faith. Oh,
bologoney. Give me a break." There is
such a thing as depression. There is
such a thing as loneliness as the snot
gets kicked out of you by life. So now
we got to know Christ. And I find great
comfort that in Philippians 3:10, Paul
writes, "I want to know Christ and the
power of his resurrection and the
fellowship of sharing in his suffering."
Remember, you worship a suffering God
who got the snot kicked out of him and
he was nailed to wooden cross. So you
can connect with this God. This God can
connect with you. He's a suffering God.
And then ultimately, brother, we have
the solution to suffering. We're going
to go through good times. We're going to
go through hard times in this life. And
you're going through them now, both of
them. And yet, we have the ultimate
solution for suffering and death. And
that solution is eternal life in a
heaven. Well, there will be no more
still birth, no more cancer, no more
heart failure, no more little kids
getting knocked into early graves by
ridiculous car accidents, but eternal
life in the presence of God. So come on,
my atheist agnostic friend. Let's go
into the hospital. Come on, my atheist
agnostic friend. Let's go into the room
where the baby lies, whose body is being
shredded by terminal cancer. What are
you going to do? You're going to wave
your fist in God's face and blame God?
That's a copout. That's misplaced blame.
I as a follow of Christ walk to the
other side of the bed, and I too will
held that child's hand and seek to
comfort that child. But in Jesus Christ,
I've got a suffering God who gives a rip
about death, about grieving people, who
wants to comfort us and wrap his arms
around us. That, my friend, is the
solution to the very real problem of
suffering and death. Jesus Christ.
