Welcome to Huberman Lab Essentials,
where we revisit past episodes for the
most potent and actionable science-based
tools for mental health, physical
health, and performance.
I'm Andrew Huberman and I'm a professor
of neurobiology and opthalmology at
Stamford School of Medicine. Today we
are discussing the immune system and we
are also discussing how the nervous
system can be used to activate and
control the immune system. The first
topic we have to attack is the question
of what is the immune system and how
does it work. I'd like to just take a
moment and do a sort of brief immune
system 101. Really simple cover the
basic elements of the immune system so
that everyone listening or watching this
can get a clear sense of how the immune
system functions and what its basic
parts are. It's actually really simple
because it is truly elegant in design.
You have three main layers of defense
for your health. And the first of those
three is a physical barrier that we call
your skin. And that might seem kind of
obvious, but
everything about you is contained in
this compartment that is boundaried by
your skin. If you've ever had a cut, you
essentially have a breach of the
boundary that is your immune system.
still in category one, your body and
your external surface, you have openings
to that surface. So what are those
openings? Well, let's start at the top
and work our way down. A primary site of
potential infection are your eyes, you
have your ears, you have your nostrils,
you have your mouth. Okay, those are
going to be the primary sites by which
things can get into your system. And you
need to put things into your system. You
need to drink and eat, and you need to
get light into your system. That's why
you have those openings. And then of
course along the back of your throat all
the way down to your stomach and your
digestive system and through your
intestines and out your rectum you have
a tube that you are basically a series
of tubes. I've said that before in this
podcast and this is one such tube by
which you extract nutrients from the
outside environment. But all along that
tube, including your nose and your
mouth, it's lined with mucus. And while
mucus might seem kind of gross to some
of you, the more you learn about mucus,
the more you realize that mucus is
really, really cool because mucus
essentially acts as a filter, as a trap
for bacteria and viruses. And it has
certain ways of scrubbing or killing
those bacteria and viruses. Now,
inevitably,
bacteria, viruses, and parasitic
infections are going to make their way
into our body. But whether or not they
are killed off or whether or not they
take over and cause us harm is going to
be determined by layers two and three.
So layers two and three are the
so-called innate immune system and the
adaptive immune system. So the innate
immune system is what I would call the
second layer of defense. It's very fast.
So this innate immune system is this
rapid response when something enters our
system and our body doesn't recognize
it. It's something that's either a
bacteria, virus, or parasite. And the
innate immune system involves the
release of particular cells that are
waiting, dormant, ready to attack
whatever this invader is. And some of
these cell types you've heard of before.
The most typical one are the are the
so-called white blood cells. So the
white blood cells will actively go to
the site of invasion and will start to
encapsulate or try and um surround that
given invader. The other names of these
different cell types are things like
neutrfils, macrofasages, natural killer
cells. They're just a few of the many
types of immune cells. They work in
concert with two other assistants and
those assistants are called the
complement proteins. complement proteins
exist in the blood and what they do is
they travel to sites where there's an
invasion and they mark certain things
for being engulfed and eaten. So they
sort of put a a an eat me tag on it and
then there are the cells that are either
damaged from the injury or from the
parasite or are suffering because of the
bacteria or the virus itself. And the
cells of your body will also release an
alarm signal which is not an eat me
signal but a help me signal. And those
help me signals come in the form what we
call cytoines. And the cytoines are
things like interlucan 1, interlucan 6,
tumor necrosis factor alpha. The
interlucan is shouting out help me. The
compliment proteins are coming in and
saying eat this and tagging the the
invader with an eat me signal. And then
the killer cells and the white blood
cells are doing the job of of trying to
kill off that thing. That's the innate
immune system. So that your skin and
your mucus lining plus your innate
immune system are a beautiful
two-layered
set of defenses against various kinds of
invaders and infections. And then
there's the third type which is the
adaptive immune system. And you'll
notice that leading up until now I
haven't said the word antibbody at all.
And that's because it is the job not of
the skin or the mucus or the microbiome
or the innate immune system to produce
antibodies that can recognize specific
invaders, but rather it is the job of
the adaptive immune system to create
antibodies against bacteria, viruses,
and even parasites and even physical um
intruders to your system. So the
adaptive imu im immune system has this
incredible ability to show up at the
site of invasion or infection or
inflammation. And what it does is it
actually attaches to and creates a sort
of a an imprint of the shape of whatever
invader happens to be there. and then
using that imprint in concert with some
other cells creates antibodies that are
specific to recognize that invader
should the body ever have that invader
inside of it again. Now that's why it's
called the adaptive immune system and in
many ways it creates a memory of a prior
infection so that these antibodies can
be made anytime that same invader comes
back again. All right and so this is the
basis of what we call immunity. Now
there are a lot more details to the
adaptive immune system but I just want
to emphasize a few points that might be
relevant. Um first of all the name of
the antibodies that are created
sometimes come in the form of IGM
and IGG things of that sort. This isn't
a full deep dive immunology class but IG
stands for immunogloabbulin. Okay. So
the imunog gloabbulins are part of the
adaptive immune response in in creating
antibodies.
If you hear IgM, the IgM is the first of
the adaptive immune responses and it
tends to come on earlier. So if somebody
is immunopositive for IgM for a
particular type of viral or bacterial
invader, that means that it was a fairly
recent infection.
Later, one creates the adaptive immune
system, I should say, creates an IGG,
which is the more stable form of the
specific antibbody that's going to
recognize a given invader. So, IGG tends
to come up a little bit later. So, just
to recap, something gets into your
system. Then there's the innate
response, which is a more general
response of trying to contain and combat
the infection or invader. And then the
adaptive response is the one that
generates the antibodies. First the IGM
response, the imunog globbulin M
response and then the im immunoglobulin
G response, IGG response. So how do we
keep these three barriers or these three
defense systems to infection tuned up?
One of the key ways we can do that is to
keep that mucous lining in really good
shape. And what does that mean? Well,
the the mucus lining needs to turn over
quite often and it needs to be the
correct chemistry to be a trap for the
bad stuff and for it to be permeable to
the good stuff, to the nutrients that we
need. And it is now very clear from
hundreds, if not thousands of studies
that the best way to do that is to
maintain a healthy so-called microbiome.
The microbiome being these little
bacterial organisms that are good for us
that live all along our mucous pathways
and even in our eyes. Now, just to be
really clear, it's not just about the
gut microbiome. We actually have a a
microbiome in our eyes. We have one
that's specific to our mouth. We have a
nasal specific microbiome. There's one
all along the gut. And the species of
microbota that live all along the
digestive tract differ from the mouth to
the throat to the stomach, intestines,
and to the rectum. It's well established
that there are healthy microbiota that
live all along that length and they
differ along that length. This is a
reminder that whenever possible, unless
eating or speaking, you want to be nasal
breathing, not breathing through your
mouth. Your nose is a much better filter
for viruses and bacteria than is your
mouth. And so be a nose breather, not a
mouth breather. You will combat more uh
of the infections that you are
constantly confronted with. The other
way to try and keep out bad things and
to avoid getting sick is the advice that
your mother and certainly my mother uh
gave me, which is to not touch your eyes
after touching other people or touching
other surfaces. And the reason to avoid
doing that is the eyes are a primary
entry point for a lot of bacteria and
viruses. And then the third way to keep
a healthy line of defense uh for your uh
entire mucous tract is to enhance the
proliferation of good gut microbiota.
The best way to enhance the quality of
your gut microbiome and the mucous
lining that serves as this protective
layer all along your body is to ingest
two to four servings a day of fermented
foods, low sugar fermented foods. It
helps reduce the activity of certain
cytoines. When people have a healthy gut
microbiome, there are fewer cells in the
body being infected from outside
infections and therefore less of a
reason for cells to be crying out help
because they are thriving, not
suffering. Things like sauerkraut,
things like natto, if uh if you can
access that, kimchi, pickles, again, low
sugar sources are going to be uh the
sources that are going to be most
effective for this. Next, I'd like to
talk about what's called sickness
behavior. Sickness behavior is a suite
of responses that we tend to all undergo
when we are feeling sick. The main thing
about sickness behavior is that it tends
to involve a slowing of our usual levels
of activity. People start to feel
lethargic or they feel like the
activities that previously they could do
with relative ease are very difficult
for them or somewhat overwhelming. The
other thing you start to see is that
people and animals by the way stop
grooming. They stop taking care of
themselves, not necessarily stop
showering, although oftentimes that's
the case, but they will stop uh doing
their hair, they'll stop putting on
makeup, uh you know, depending on
whether or not they did that before,
they might stop. Animals will stop
licking and grooming themselves.
People will stop taking care of their
cosmetic appearance. Now, it's not just
because they don't care how they look
when they're sick. It's because there's
this overall suppression of certain
kinds of activities and an enhancement
of other kinds of activities. And this
is really important. Sickness behavior
is actually a motivated state. It's a
state that's designed to accomplish
certain things. One of the other
features of sickness behavior in
addition to being lethargic, loss of
grooming, will be a loss of appetite.
Right? And often times people who have a
great appetite normally just won't feel
hungry at all. When we have that, we can
be kind of irritable. We don't want to
do certain things and we just want to be
left alone. Things are harder. How? Why?
Well, there's a known pathway which is
the so-called vagus nerve that connects
the body and the brain signals to
particular brain sites to engage this
category of motivational state that we
call sickness behavior. The vagus nerve
is a very extensive nerve pathway. It's
the 10th cranial nerve. comes out of the
back of the the brain stem, heads into
the body and and branches out
extensively to intervate or connect to
many of our organs including our lungs,
our heart, our gut, etc. And all of
those organs are able also to send
neural signals back up to the brain. We
sometimes hear the vagus as the route to
calming ourselves down. Unfortunately,
that's more or less a myth that I don't
know how it got propagated. There have
now been many studies of the vagus in
various contexts including in sickness
behavior and it's very clear that the
vagus nerve is the fast pathway by which
an infection in the body is signaled to
the brain to a particular location in
the brain called the hypothalamus which
harbors a lot of different types of
neurons. Neurons for instance in the
preoptic area that increase body
temperature and fever. Right? That's one
of the most important things is to
increase body temperature in order to
it's the body's attempt to kill off this
invader because many viruses and many
bacteria don't survive well at elevated
heat. That's the function of a fever. It
also sends input to areas of the brain
that change your perception of the
outside world. One of the most uh
obvious of these obvious once I tell it
to you is phototohobia. Right? I love
bright sunshine. I love bright lights
when I want to be alert. But most people
when they are sick, when there's an
inflammation response in the body, they
feel like bright lights are kind of
aversive. They get a wellescribed kind
of classical phototohobia. And that's
mediated by a pathway that goes from
your eye to an area of your phalamus
called the anterior nucleus of the of
the phalamus. Then from there up to the
outer lining of the brain which is the
meninges just sort of the on the outside
of the brain where the brain starts to
interface with some of the other uh
connective tissues. It can actually
create a phototoobia and a headache when
one is ill. And the last element I'd
like to talk about is the rest. There's
something that gets triggered from the
body to the brain to the hypothalamus
and there are nuclei there that promote
the desire to sleep even during the
daytime. what would normally be the
active phase of your circadian cycle.
Now, that is really interesting because
what's happening here is you've got
multiple pathways that are saying avoid
light, reduce your amount of behavior,
heat up all the things that are making
you sick. This is sickness behavior and
it's going from your your body to your
mind to to make you do the right thing.
Now, there's also a slow pathway that's
purely mediated by the blood. So-called
hummeral factors, not because they're
funny, but hummeral factors or factors
of the blood. As you have an effect an
infection for many hours or days, the
amount of IL6 and IL1 and tumor necrosis
factor and other inflammatory cytoines
is starting to increase such that the
total amount in your circulation gets
high enough and is communicated to the
brain. And it tends to enter the brain
through a particular type of tissue
that's really interesting called koid. C
h o r o i d. the koid starts releasing
and responding to these cytoines
uh the inflammatory cytoines and then
the brain actually starts to experience
all sorts of changes in terms of
inflammation to neurons your memory
tends to get poor your cognition tends
to get poor these are transient things
most often these eventually these things
will pass but this is deep into sickness
when you're really feeling lousy you
can't read you can't watch a movie you
can't do anything so if you ever get
sick and you just can't be bothered by
anything, it's probably because you've
had that fast response from the body and
you've also had this slower response
where you literally have a set of
tissues in your brain that are sending
out these these inflammatory signals and
now your whole brain is starting to cope
or is trying to cope with this
infection. So, you've got a slow pathway
and a fast pathway. That all sounds
really terrible. So now I'd like to talk
about what you can do to reduce the
probability of getting sick. And there
are actually things that one can do as
you start to get sick and once you're
sick to accelerate the healing process
by flipping the equation. Up until now,
we've been talking about how the body
activates certain areas in the brain to
create sickness behavior that's very
much like depression. You're probably
all familiar with this from anytime
you've had a cold or a flu or something
really lousy or an injury. Now, let's
flip the equation and ask, what can we
do with our nervous system in order to
enhance the function of our immune
system in order to be able to heal and
recover from illness and injury more
quickly? We all know what we should do.
We should all hydrate, drink some water,
and go to sleep, right? That's what
we're all we are all told. But there are
actually things that you can actively do
in order to get your immune system to
deploy a more robust response at that
early phase of potential infection.
Let's focus first on the rest component.
Yes, of course, we are all told that we
should take a hot shower and go to
sleep, you know, and get nine or 10
hours of sleep. But there's an
interesting way of looking at sleep
specifically for its role in enhancing
the immune system during sleep and in
particular during sleep that's
associated with the early stage of any
kind of viral or bacterial infection.
The so-called glimpmphatic system is
much more active than it would be
normally. What's the glimpmphatic
system? The glimpmphatic system with a G
is a system in the brain by which debris
that accumulates throughout the day. But
in particular, debris that accumulates
under conditions of neuroinflammation
and inflammation of the body is cleared
out or is washed out of the brain. And
the activity of this lymphatic system is
extremely important for the recovery
from infection of any kind. There is a
way that you can increase the activity
of your lymphatic system under normal
circumstances
because of the mechanics of the
lymphatic system. It turns out that if
you elevate your heels by about 12°, it
doesn't have to be exactly 12 as you
sleep by putting maybe a rolled pillow
or two pillows underneath your feet. By
having the head below your legs, it
seems that there's more glimpmphatic
wash out or clearance during sleep. So,
I would say if you're not feeling well,
yes, take the hot shower. Yes, uh get
into bed and go to sleep, but elevate
your feet to try and increase the
activity of the glimpmphatic system.
Some might even consider that
if you have to be awake that you might
want to be awake with your feet elevated
above your head. Now, that might not be
practical for the workplace, um but it
might be practical for a short nap
during the day or or something of that
sort. Next, I'd like to do an indepth
analysis of a study that has achieved
some prominence out there, not just in
the scientific literature, but on the
internet because it relates to how
particular types of breathing can impact
the immune system and the ability to
combat infection. The title of this
paper is voluntary activation of the
sympathetic nervous system and
attenuation of the innate immune
response in humans. This is a paper that
was published in PNAS which is the
proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences USA. It's a very prestigious
journal and I just want to describe the
basic contour of the study. I'll explain
the findings and then I want to go in
depth and explain the mechanistic basis
for these findings and the protocol that
we can all export from these findings.
So here we go. So first of all a couple
of terms so that everybody is on the
same page.
The sympathetic nervous system is one
division of our nervous system. It's a
set of neurons down the middle of our
spinal cord and in our brain that
generally lead to a heightened state of
arousal and alertness. It's associated
with epinephrine release in the brain
and adrenaline release in the body. It's
the so-called fight orflight system when
it's really active, but it's the system
that's active when we are wide awake.
And we already talked about the innate
immune system. That's that first line of
defense after the skin barrier of course
whereby some infection comes into the
body and there's this rapid response of
increasing inflammation. And that's also
about the time that you first feel
lousy. So when you start to feel like I
think I've got something I don't feel
right. I headache. I feel nauseous. I'm
heating up. I I don't feel good. That's
that's the the innate immune system
kicking in. So what they did in this
study, they injected people with E.coli.
There's a bacteria which makes people
all people feel terrible. These people
voluntarily signed up for this study.
However, some of the subjects in this
study
performed
a behavioral protocol that can best be
described as cyclic hyperventilation. So
they're comparing controls that do just
sort of a basic meditation versus people
that do this intense breathing followed
by some breath holds. In the
intervention group, the breathing group,
plasma levels of anti-inflammatory
cytoine IL10. So this is a cytoine that
is lowers inflammation increased
after endotoxin administration
and that was triggered by an increase in
epinephrine and adrenaline. So in other
words, doing a particular pattern of
breathing allowed an anti-inflammatory
cytoine to be turned on. And they
discovered that levels of
pro-inflammatory
TNF alpha, tumor necrosis factor alpha,
IL6, interlucan 6, and interlucan 8,
which you should all be familiar with
now as pro-inflammatory cytoines were
lower in the intervention group.
Finally, flu-l like symptoms were lower
in the intervention group. So this is an
amazing finding, right? These are human
subjects. One is one group of subjects
is doing this breathing protocol. The
other group of subjects is just
meditating. They both both sets of
subjects have been in injected with E.
coli. So you know everyone's getting the
same amount placed into their system.
How in the world does this work? Why
does this work? First of all, what is
this magical pattern of breathing? Some
of you may recognize this as so-called
Wimhof breathing. The breathing that is
so-called Wimhof breathing is very
similar not exactly the same but very
similar to tumo breathing as it's been
described historically in the science
and physiology community refer to it as
cyclic hyperventilation which just means
repeated deep breaths in and out and
then there are these retention. So I'm
uh because I'm here uh in the hot seat
anyway I might as well uh demonstrate it
for you so you know what this looks
like. It involves
20 to 30 deep inhales and and then
exhales through the mouth followed by a
exhale of all one's air and a breath
hold. That's the retention
and then at some point 15 to 60 seconds
later repeating the 25 or 30 breaths and
then again a a breath hold with lungs
empty. Okay, I'm not going to do the
whole thing right now but it it goes
something like this.
Okay. So, let's assume I did that for 30
30 breaths. I can already feel myself um
persspiring a little bit. You're heating
up. That's the release of adrenaline.
It's caused by that breathing pattern.
And then exhaling all of one's air. No
speaking in between like I'm doing.
And then sitting lungs empty until one
feels the impulse to breathe. and then
repeating for several rounds, two or
three or even four rounds.
Basically, this study looked at people
doing cyclic hyperventilation with
retention. Three rounds of 25 to 30
breaths followed by exhale hold in
between of various duration but in
general 15 to 60 seconds is typical. So
what's going on here? How is the
breathing leading to these shifts in
or I should say reduction in
inflammatory cytoines and an increase in
the liberation of these
anti-inflammatory cytoines. This is
beyond the scope of this discussion, but
that it's actually the release of
epinephrine, aka adrenaline, that's
causing this reduction in inflammation.
And that's actually supported by
something that you've probably
experienced before, which is if you've
ever worked worked worked worked really
hard or you've been care a caretaker for
somebody else or studying for exams and
people around you are getting sick and
you're just powering through it and
you're not getting sick, but then you
stop. you turn in your final exam, you
you stop taking care of somebody else,
or you finally stop and rest, or you go
on vacation, and then you get sick.
Well, you've just experienced the effect
that adrenaline, epinephrine, can have
in activating your immune system by way
of the nervous system in order to keep
fighting and combating infection. And
that brings us to a larger theme which
is that stress and combating infection
or a wound is
not one unique system. It's the same
stress system that you use to combat
psychological stress. So when you're
very very stressed at least in the short
term because you release so much
adrenaline and epinephrine, you're
actually better able to combat
infections and you reduce inflammation
and the whole feeling lousy response.
Right? Remember reduced flu-l like
symptoms here. So this pattern of
breathing is actually a very useful
tool. And I confess I use this pattern
of breathing anytime I am at the initial
stages of of getting some sort of bug.
If I feel like I've been running myself
ragged or if I somehow for whatever
reason have a tickle in my throat or I
have that kind of sensation in my nose
like I might have um might have caught a
bug of some sort. I will do this pattern
of breathing. I've been doing it
consistently gosh for the last four
years or or more. Um, you know, now this
is just anecdotal uh reports, but I find
that it allows me indeed to either have
those early symptoms disappear or it
allows me to just kind of push through
and and harder longer. I don't suggest
people continue to push through exposure
to infections. Obviously, you don't want
to infect other people. Um, nor do you
want to crash and suddenly get get a
massive uh illness of some sort because
you stop doing this breathing. But I do
think it's a useful tool. It's a purely
behavioral intervention that has been
shown here and now there are additional
studies on the way to enhance the
function of your immune system and to
reduce inflammation. And this is to me
one of the most concrete examples of a
zerocost tool that bridges the
activation of the nervous system through
breathing with the immune system by way
of releasing adrenaline and thereby
reducing the terrible effects or
feelings of lousiness from a in this
case an e.coli infection. There's one
last very interesting feature of this
study that I want to emphasize and that
was that they actually measured the
so-called catakolamine concentrations.
Catakolamines are things like dopamine,
epinephrine, norepinephrine. These are
chemicals in your nervous system and
body that promote states of alertness.
Uh dopamine of course part of the reward
and motivation pathways.
They explored the levels of these
molecules in blood in plasma during and
after this breathing protocol and it was
interesting as I mentioned before
epinephrine showed robust increases
compared to the control group.
Norepinephrine significant increases
occurred in the in the breathing group
but um in the cyclic hyperventilation
retention breathing group of course um
but less so um and dopamine levels
actually um dropped somewhat. But this
is very interesting because there's a
new and emerging literature
largely from ISA aa rolls lab uh in
Israel. What her laboratory has shown is
that motivational state and mindset has
a powerful impact on various aspects of
the immune system that were thought to
be independent of the brain and mind and
thinking. They explored the
wellestablished psychological phenomenon
that when cancer patients or very ill
people or people who are suffering from
very debilitating injuries when they had
or repo when people had or reported a
sense of hope their rates of recovery
were much higher. Right? Sounds very
subjective but what is a sense of hope?
A sense of hope is a sense of the
future. a sense of the future is tightly
associated with the dopamine system. And
so what they've discovered and through
other studies from uh other groups have
discovered is that stimulation of the
dopamine pathway either simply by
thinking about a a future
ideally a positive future. Thinking
about a positive future leads to
activation of this so-called misolyic
reward pathway and could reduce the size
of tumors, could accelerate wound
healing, could greatly accelerate the
passage from a state of illness to a
state of health and well-being. It's
because this reward pathway and the fact
that it's related to a sense of the
future seems to liberate entire systems
within the body that make inflammatory
cytoines go down and anti-inflammatory
cytoines go up exactly as was
demonstrated in the beautiful PNAS study
where breathing
cyclic hyperventilation was used to
increase epinephrine increase
norepinephrine and to augment the cat
catakolamine system. So I think that
that the bridges between these studies
are really relevant. There is a very
exciting article published from Chufu
Ma's lab at Harvard Medical School and
the title of the article is a
neuroanatomical basis for
electroacupuncture to drive the veagal
adrenal axis. When Shufu's lab looked at
stimulation of the body with so-called
electroacupuncture. So this is these are
needles where a small bit of electrical
current low level of electrical current
is passed uh into the the needle and
therefore into the body. They located
sites on the body that can increase
inflammation by way of releasing
inflammatory cytoines. These areas
included the the abdomen and they found
areas on the body such as the uh lower
limbs or the hind limbs in this case
that can stimulate the veagal adrenal
reflex uh and can lead to reduced
inflammation. And what was really
interesting is that they figured out
that it was activation of nerve endings
that resided in the fascia. The fascia
is a a really thick sheath of tissue
that surrounds muscle. And so what they
discovered is there's a specific
population of neurons. Those neurons
have a name as they often do in science.
Name isn't important, but if you want to
look it up, it's the proc R2 neurons. P
R O K R2 neurons. and they send a
connection deep into the limb fascial
tissue. And then they send another wire
up into the spinal cord and to a region
of the hindb brain uh in the back of
your brain kind of near your neck called
the medulla in the medulla oblangata.
That neuron also has a name called the
DMZ doesn't matter. And that neuron
connects to the adrenal gland to release
our good old friends the catakolamines
nor adrenaline, adrenaline and dopamine
or norepinephrine, epinephrine and and
dopamine. So what is all this saying?
This is saying that activation of the
deep fascial tissue causes a chain of
neural reactions that leads eventually
to the release of norepinephrine,
noradrenaline, adrenaline and dopamine
and once again lowers inflammation very
much like the breathing study that we
talked about earlier in the pattern of
cyclic hyperventilation with retention
leading to reductions in inflammation.
Okay, so thus far we've been discussing
how one can prevent getting sick or when
one starts to feel ill, how one might be
able to shorten the course of that
infection by ramping up the activity of
the immune system. But what about when
you're already experiencing symptoms?
There are many ways to address that at
the symptom level. You're probably aware
of all the over-the-counter medications,
many of which focus on the epinephrine
system. you know, things that are of the
pseudafed variety prevent or reduce
congestion because of the way that they
cause release of epinephrine and some of
the effects on dilating the bronchioles
and dilating the nasal passages and so
forth.
I'm not going to speak to whether or not
those are good or bad choices. They do
have a couple of effects that are not so
great for the course of uh treating the
underlying cause which are first of all
they can cause dehydration. So you have
to make sure that you're hydrating well
both fluids and electrolytes and they
also can interfere with sleep. There is
an interesting alternative choice and
when I say alternative I do mean
alternative. Uh the choice I'm referring
to is spirulina which is actually a form
of algae. There are some really nice
studies and some data and also an
understanding of the mechanism by which
spirulina can have potent effects in
reducing what's called rhinitis which is
a fancy word for uh congestion of the
nose and and inflammation of the nose.
These looked at humans. So this is not a
mouse study. This is a study on humans.
U both sexes. So males and females um in
one case looking at 100 plus subjects,
129 subjects. The other 65 subjects. So
decent number of subjects. randomized
trial double blind. Um both cases saw
significant decreases in nasal
obstruction, improved ability to smell,
uh improved sleep, uh daily working
cytoine, uh inflammatory cytoines were
reduced as well. Um reduction nasal
itching, all the stuff you'd like like
to experience. I I can imagine after
taking two grams, two grams, not
milligrams, but two grams of spirulina.
Once again, we've covered a lot of
information. Today, we learned about the
immune system, the adaptive immune
system, the innate immune system, and
the nervous system and how those
interact. And throughout, we discuss
protocols that can allow you to tap into
this relationship between the nervous
system and immune system and hopefully
avoid and/or shorten the course of any
illnesses, injuries, or inflammation
that you might encounter.
[Music]
